{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red85\green85\blue85;\red100\green100\blue100;}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440

{\pard\qc\sb200\sa100{\f0\fs36\b Mediation Opening Script}\par}
{\pard\qc\sb0\sa200{\f0\fs22\cf2 Mediator\u8217's Introduction for the Opening Session}\par}
{\pard\sb100\sa100{\f0\fs20\cf3 ____________________________________________________________}\par}

{\pard\sb240\sa60{\f0\fs24\b\ul 1. Welcome and Introductions}\par}
{\pard\li600\ri600\sb60\sa60{\f0\fs22\i \u8220"Welcome, and thank you both for being here today. My name is Helen Calabria, and I will be your mediator. Before we begin, I want to take a few minutes to explain what mediation is, how this process works, what my role is, and what you can expect today. Please feel free to ask questions at any point.\par
\par
I\u8217'd like to start by having each of you briefly introduce yourself \u8212- just your name and how you\u8217'd like to be addressed. I\u8217'll go first.\u8221"}\par}

{\pard\sb240\sa60{\f0\fs24\b\ul 2. What Mediation Is}\par}
{\pard\li600\ri600\sb60\sa60{\f0\fs22\i \u8220"Mediation is a voluntary, confidential process in which a neutral third party \u8212- me \u8212- helps you communicate more effectively and work toward a resolution that you both find acceptable. It is not a court proceeding. I am not a judge, and I will not decide anything for you. The goal is for {\b you} to reach your own agreement, on your own terms.\par
\par
Mediation works best when both parties come in with a genuine willingness to listen and to be heard. You don\u8217't have to agree on everything to start \u8212- you just have to be willing to try.\u8221"}\par}

{\pard\sb240\sa60{\f0\fs24\b\ul 3. The Steps of the Process}\par}
{\pard\li600\ri600\sb60\sa60{\f0\fs22\i \u8220"Here\u8217's how today\u8217's session will generally unfold:\par
\par
{\b Step 1 \u8212- Opening statements.} Each of you will have uninterrupted time to share your perspective on what has brought you here and what matters most to you. You won\u8217't need to argue your case \u8212- just speak openly.\par
\par
{\b Step 2 \u8212- Issue identification.} Together, we\u8217'll identify the key issues that need to be addressed. I\u8217'll help us organize and prioritize them so we stay focused.\par
\par
{\b Step 3 \u8212- Exploration.} We\u8217'll explore each issue in depth \u8212- the interests and concerns behind each of your positions, not just the positions themselves. This is often where real understanding begins.\par
\par
{\b Step 4 \u8212- Option generation.} We\u8217'll brainstorm possible solutions. At this stage, no idea is off the table. We\u8217're looking for options, not commitments.\par
\par
{\b Step 5 \u8212- Negotiation and agreement.} We\u8217'll evaluate the options together and work toward a mutually acceptable resolution. If we reach agreement, I can help you document it clearly.\par
\par
We may not get through all of these steps in one session, and that\u8217's okay. We go at whatever pace works for you both.\u8221"}\par}

{\pard\sb240\sa60{\f0\fs24\b\ul 4. Roles}\par}
{\pard\li600\ri600\sb60\sa60{\f0\fs22\i {\b Your roles:}\par
\u8220"Each of you is here as an equal participant. You both have the right to speak, to be heard, and to make decisions. You also have the responsibility to let the other person finish speaking without interruption, to speak respectfully, and to engage in good faith.\par
\par
If at any point you feel you need a break, a moment to collect your thoughts, or a private conversation with me \u8212- called a caucus \u8212- just say so.\par
\par
{\b My role:}\par
My job is to facilitate, not to take sides. I will help guide the conversation, ask questions, and reflect back what I\u8217'm hearing to make sure you understand each other. I will not tell you what to do, evaluate who is \u8216'right,\u8217' or pressure you toward any particular outcome. I work for both of you equally.\u8221"}\par}

{\pard\sb240\sa60{\f0\fs24\b\ul 5. Confidentiality}\par}
{\pard\li600\ri600\sb60\sa60{\f0\fs22\i \u8220"Everything discussed in this mediation is confidential. That means:\par
\par
\u8226\tab I will not share what is said here with anyone outside this room without your consent.\par
\u8226\tab If we hold private caucuses, I will not share what one person tells me privately with the other party unless you give me permission to do so.\par
\u8226\tab Mediation discussions generally cannot be used as evidence in any future legal proceedings.\par
\par
There are a few important exceptions to confidentiality that I am legally required to follow: if I hear information suggesting that someone is at imminent risk of harm to themselves or others, or if there is a disclosure of child abuse or neglect, I am obligated to report that. Outside of those exceptions, this is a confidential process.\par
\par
Do you have any questions about confidentiality before we continue?\u8221"}\par}

{\pard\sb240\sa60{\f0\fs24\b\ul 6. Goals of the Session}\par}
{\pard\li600\ri600\sb60\sa60{\f0\fs22\i \u8220"The goals for today are:\par
\par
\u8226\tab To give each of you a safe space to be heard\par
\u8226\tab To improve communication and mutual understanding between you\par
\u8226\tab To identify the issues that matter most\par
\u8226\tab To work toward practical, realistic solutions that you\u8217've both shaped\par
\par
A successful mediation doesn\u8217't have to mean a signed agreement today \u8212- it might mean greater clarity, a shift in perspective, or a defined next step. Progress takes many forms.\par
\par
What success looks like is ultimately up to you.\u8221"}\par}

{\pard\sb240\sa60{\f0\fs24\b\ul 7. Ground Rules}\par}
{\pard\li600\ri600\sb60\sa60{\f0\fs22\i \u8220"Before we begin, I\u8217'd like to propose a few ground rules to help this process work well:\par
\par
\u8226\tab One person speaks at a time\par
\u8226\tab No interrupting\par
\u8226\tab Speak about your own experience \u8212- using \u8216'I\u8217' statements rather than accusations\par
\u8226\tab Treat each other with basic respect, even when it\u8217's difficult\par
\u8226\tab Phones on silent, please\par
\par
Are there any other ground rules either of you would like to add? And do both of you agree to these?\u8221"}\par}

{\pard\sb240\sa60{\f0\fs24\b\ul 8. Confirming Voluntary Participation and Readiness}\par}
{\pard\li600\ri600\sb60\sa60{\f0\fs22\i \u8220"I want to confirm that you are both here voluntarily and that you understand you may end the mediation at any time if you choose to do so. No one is required to reach an agreement today, and no one will be penalized for choosing not to continue.\par
\par
Are there any final questions before we begin?\par
\par
[Pause for questions.]\par
\par
Then let\u8217's get started. [Name], would you like to begin with your opening statement?\u8221"}\par}

{\pard\sb100\sa100{\f0\fs20\cf3 ____________________________________________________________}\par}

{\pard\sb200\sa60{\f0\fs22\b Notes for the Mediator}\par}
{\pard\li400\sb40\sa40{\f0\fs22 \u8226\tab Allow silences \u8212- they often lead to honest reflection.}\par}
{\pard\li400\sb40\sa40{\f0\fs22 \u8226\tab Adjust tone and pacing to the emotional temperature of the room.}\par}
{\pard\li400\sb40\sa40{\f0\fs22 \u8226\tab In high-conflict cases, consider acknowledging the courage it took to show up before moving into logistics.}\par}
{\pard\li400\sb40\sa100{\f0\fs22 \u8226\tab Keep a notepad visible \u8212- it signals you are listening carefully.}\par}

}
